\input texinfo    @c -*- texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename eve.info
@settitle Eve Manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@c %**end of header

@dircategory Emacs misc features
@direntry
* Eve: (eve).           Text-driven video editing in Emacs.
@end direntry

@finalout
@titlepage
@title Eve Manual
@author Hubert Behaghel
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Eve Manual
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::
* Getting Started::              Installing and first steps.
* The TJM Manifest::             Structure and representation of .tjm.json files.
* Transcription::                Generating manifests from audio and video files.
* Editing::                      Navigation, deletion, splitting, merging, and metadata.
* Filler Words::                 Non-destructive tagging and deletion of filler words.
* B-Roll::                       Attaching and managing supplementary video footage.
* Compilation and Rendering::    Turning the manifest into a video file.
* Playback::                     Live preview of source and rendered video.
* Display::                      Timestamp ruler, hidden segments, and word-level view.
* Key Bindings::                 Complete keybinding reference.
* Configuration Reference::      Alphabetical listing of all customizable variables.
* Architecture::                 Two-layer design and the Emacs–CLI contract.
* Development::                  Working on eve.el and the CLI.
* Appendix A TJM v1.1 Specification: Appendix A TJM v11 Specification.  Reference to the normative TJM format specification.

@detailmenu
--- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* The Big Idea::
* The Core Workflow::
* About This Manual::

Getting Started

* Installation::
* Quick Start::

Installation

* Requirements::
* Installing the CLI::
* Installing the Emacs package::
* Accessing the manual in Emacs::

Installing the Emacs package

* straight.el: straightel. 
* Manual::

The TJM Manifest

* Structure::
* How eve-mode renders a manifest::
* The raw JSON companion buffer::

Transcription

* Starting transcription from Emacs::
* Backends::
* Configuration::
* Installing optional backends::

Editing

* Navigation::
* Deletion and restoration::
* Splitting and merging::
* Reordering::
* Markers and sections::
* Inline editing::
* Metadata::
* Undo and redo::
* Validation::

Filler Words

* Concept::
* Configuration: Configuration (1). 
* Commands::
* Auto-tagging on file open::

B-Roll

* Concept: Concept (1). 
* Editing b-roll metadata::
* Compositing modes in detail::
* Audio policy::
* JSON templates::
* Placeholders without templates::
* Continuation chains::

Compositing modes in detail

* Replace mode::
* Pip mode::

JSON templates

* Overlay fields::
* Concrete example lower-third title card::

Compilation and Rendering

* Two modes draft and final::
* Under the hood::
* Pre-flight validation::
* Dry-run analysis::
* Checkpoint and resume::
* Progressive output::
* Configuration reference::
* CLI reference::

Playback

* Source playback::
* Rendered playback::
* Playback tracking and segment highlighting::
* Controls::
* Video layout::

Display

* Timestamp ruler::
* Hiding deleted segments::
* Word-level display::

Key Bindings

* Single-key bindings::
* C-c prefix bindings::
* Playback-mode overrides::
* The hydra cheatsheet::

Architecture

* Two-layer boundary::
* Shared contract::

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

Eve is an Emacs major mode for editing spoken-word videos by manipulating text
instead of cutting timelines manually.

@menu
* The Big Idea::
* The Core Workflow::
* About This Manual::
@end menu

@node The Big Idea
@section The Big Idea

Traditional video editing works at the frame level: you scrub a timeline, find
a cut point, and trim.  When your source material is a talking-head recording
or a podcast, almost every edit decision is driven by what was @emph{said} — not by
what is visible.

Eve flips the model.  A Textual Join Manifest (@samp{.tjm.json}) stores your video
as a sequence of transcribed segments, each with per-word timestamps.  You
read and edit the transcript in Emacs.  Delete a word, and it disappears from
the rendered video.  Reorder paragraphs, and the clips follow.  Annotate a
segment with a b-roll clip, and the renderer splices it in.  The text is the
edit.

@node The Core Workflow
@section The Core Workflow

The typical eve session looks like this:

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Transcribe} — run @samp{M-x eve-transcribe} on a directory of raw recordings.
Eve calls @samp{eve transcribe}, shows a visible running status while work is in
progress, and opens the resulting @samp{.tjm.json} in eve-mode on success.

@item
@strong{Edit} — delete filler words (@samp{d}, @samp{f}, @samp{F}), reorder segments (@samp{J}, @samp{K}),
add markers to name sections (@samp{o}), attach b-roll (@samp{b}).

@item
@strong{Preview} — press @samp{C-c SPC} to play the source clip from point, or
@samp{C-c C-c} to compile a draft video in seconds.

@item
@strong{Compile} — @samp{C-c C-c} renders the manifest as an @samp{.mp4}.  Draft renders
are fast (mjpeg, parallel, cached).  @samp{C-u C-c C-c} produces a final
delivery-quality H.264 export.

@item
@strong{Iterate} — the segment cache means only changed segments re-encode.
Speculative pre-rendering warms the cache on every save, so pressing
@samp{C-c C-c} after a small edit is nearly instant.
@end enumerate

@node About This Manual
@section About This Manual

This manual covers the Emacs package (@samp{eve.el}) and the accompanying CLI
(@samp{eve text-edit}, @samp{eve transcribe}).  The normative TJM v1.1 format
specification is in @samp{docs/tjm-spec.md}; this manual cross-references it but
does not reproduce it in full.

@node Getting Started
@chapter Getting Started

@menu
* Installation::
* Quick Start::
@end menu

@node Installation
@section Installation

@menu
* Requirements::
* Installing the CLI::
* Installing the Emacs package::
* Accessing the manual in Emacs::
@end menu

@node Requirements
@subsection Requirements

@itemize
@item
@strong{Emacs} 29.1 or later
@item
@strong{mpv} for live playback tracking
@item
@strong{eve CLI} for transcription and rendering (see below)
@item
@strong{hydra} (optional) for the @samp{?} keybinding cheatsheet popup
@end itemize

@node Installing the CLI
@subsection Installing the CLI

The Emacs package first looks for an @samp{eve} executable on your @samp{PATH}.  If it
does not find one, and @samp{eve-cli-program} is still set to its default @samp{"eve"},
it falls back to @samp{scripts/run-cli.sh} inside this checkout.  That script
creates a local virtualenv and installs the pre-built wheel from @samp{cli/dist/}.

For standard in-Emacs use, that local bootstrap path means a separate global
@samp{eve} install is optional.  The fallback path assumes Python 3.12 or later is
available and that the package checkout is writable.

If you want @samp{eve} on your @samp{PATH} for shell use, install it globally:

@example
pip install cli/dist/eve_cli-*.whl
# or with uv:
uv pip install cli/dist/eve_cli-*.whl
@end example

Verify it works:

@example
eve doctor --json
@end example

@node Installing the Emacs package
@subsection Installing the Emacs package

@menu
* straight.el: straightel. 
* Manual::
@end menu

@node straightel
@subsubsection straight.el

@lisp
(use-package eve
  :straight (:type git :host github :repo "behaghel/eve.el"))
@end lisp

@node Manual
@subsubsection Manual

Clone the repository, add it to @samp{load-path}, and require it:

@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "/path/to/eve.el")
(require 'eve)
@end lisp

Opening any @samp{*.tjm.json} file then activates @samp{eve-mode} automatically.

@node Accessing the manual in Emacs
@subsection Accessing the manual in Emacs

After installing the package, add the @samp{docs/} directory to Emacs's Info path:

@lisp
(add-to-list 'Info-directory-list
             (expand-file-name "docs" (file-name-directory (locate-library "eve"))))
@end lisp

Then browse the manual with @samp{C-h i m eve RET}.

@node Quick Start
@section Quick Start

This walkthrough takes you from a raw recording to a rendered clip in five
steps.

@enumerate
@item
@strong{Transcribe a recording}

@example
M-x eve-transcribe RET
@end example

Select the directory containing your @samp{.mp4} files.  Eve starts
@samp{eve transcribe} in the background, keeps a visible @samp{Eve: transcribing…}
status in the mode line while it runs, and opens the manifest
automatically in eve-mode when it finishes.

@item
@strong{Read through the transcript}

Navigate with @samp{j} / @samp{k}.  The buffer shows each spoken segment as a block
of text.  Timestamps appear in the right margin.

@item
@strong{Delete unwanted content}

Place point on a word and press @samp{d} to delete it.  Press @samp{D} to delete the
whole segment.  Press @samp{f} on a word to tag it as a filler; press @samp{F} to
delete all tagged fillers at once.

@item
@strong{Compile a draft preview}

@example
C-c C-c
@end example

Eve validates the manifest, pre-renders changed segments in the background,
and produces a draft @samp{.mp4} in seconds.  Play it back with
@samp{C-u C-c SPC} or your usual player.

@item
@strong{Export for delivery}

@example
C-u C-c C-c
@end example

Compiles at full H.264 quality using the same segment cache.  Only
segments that haven't been cached yet need re-encoding.
@end enumerate

@node The TJM Manifest
@chapter The TJM Manifest

@menu
* Structure::
* How eve-mode renders a manifest::
* The raw JSON companion buffer::
@end menu

@node Structure
@section Structure

A TJM manifest is a JSON file with two top-level arrays:

@itemize
@item
@samp{sources} — a list of media files referenced by the edit.  Each entry has
an @samp{id} used throughout the manifest and a @samp{file} path.

@item
@samp{segments} — the ordered timeline.  Each segment references a source, a
start and end time (in seconds or ticks), and the spoken text.  Optional
fields carry per-word timestamps, b-roll metadata, speaker identity, tags,
and notes.
@end itemize

A minimal manifest:

@example
@{
  "version": 1,
  "sources": [
    @{ "id": "clip01", "file": "raw/recording.mp4" @}
  ],
  "segments": [
    @{
      "id": "clip01-s0001",
      "source": "clip01",
      "start": 12.34,
      "end": 15.60,
      "text": "This is what was said."
    @}
  ]
@}
@end example

The TJM v1.1 specification in @samp{docs/tjm-spec.md} defines every field,
including the tick-based timing model, the edit overlay, and the render
contract.

@node How eve-mode renders a manifest
@section How eve-mode renders a manifest

Eve-mode presents the manifest as readable text.  Each segment is shown as a
paragraph with its text content.  Markers appear as section headings.
Deleted words are hidden by default (toggle with @samp{C-c C-h}).  Per-word
timestamps are hidden unless @samp{C-c C-w} is active.

The buffer is read-only as prose — you interact through keybindings, not
direct text editing.  The underlying JSON is always kept in sync.

@node The raw JSON companion buffer
@section The raw JSON companion buffer

Press @samp{C-c C-o} (@samp{eve-open-raw-json}) to open the underlying JSON in a
companion buffer.  This is useful for low-level inspection or edits that
the structured commands don't cover.  Saving the companion buffer reloads
the eve-mode view.

@node Transcription
@chapter Transcription

@menu
* Starting transcription from Emacs::
* Backends::
* Configuration::
* Installing optional backends::
@end menu

@node Starting transcription from Emacs
@section Starting transcription from Emacs

Two commands launch transcription:

@itemize
@item
@samp{M-x eve-transcribe} prompts for a directory, scans for media files, and
starts @samp{eve transcribe} asynchronously.  While it runs, Eve shows a visible
@samp{Eve: transcribing…} mode-line status.  On success the manifest opens
automatically in eve-mode.

@item
@samp{M-x eve-dired-transcribe} runs from Dired using the marked files (or the
file at point when nothing is marked).
@end itemize

On failure, the @samp{*eve transcribe*} buffer appears so you can inspect the error
output.

@node Backends
@section Backends

@samp{eve transcribe} supports three backends:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Backend
@tab Flag
@tab Notes
@item @samp{faster-whisper}
@tab @samp{--backend faster-whisper}
@tab Default.  Fast, local, good accuracy.
@item @samp{transformers}
@tab @samp{--backend transformers}
@tab HuggingFace models.  Needs optional deps.
@item @samp{nemo}
@tab @samp{--backend nemo}
@tab NVIDIA NeMo.  Needs optional deps.
@end multitable

The @samp{--verbatim} flag (on by default in Emacs) biases @samp{faster-whisper} toward
preserving disfluencies and filler words.  For @samp{transformers} and @samp{nemo},
choose a verbatim-friendly model instead.

Good starting points:
@itemize
@item
@samp{transformers}: @samp{nyrahealth/CrisperWhisper}
@item
@samp{nemo}: @samp{nvidia/parakeet-ctc-1.1b}
@end itemize

@node Configuration
@section Configuration

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Variable
@tab Default
@tab Description
@item @samp{eve-transcribe-backend}
@tab @samp{"faster-whisper"}
@tab Backend name passed to @samp{eve transcribe}.
@item @samp{eve-transcribe-model}
@tab @samp{"medium.en"}
@tab Model identifier.
@item @samp{eve-transcribe-verbatim}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Pass @samp{--verbatim} to the backend.
@item @samp{eve-transcribe-tag-fillers}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Tag filler words during transcription.
@item @samp{eve-media-extensions}
@tab @samp{("mp4" "mov" ...)}
@tab File types scanned by @samp{eve-transcribe}.
@end multitable

@node Installing optional backends
@section Installing optional backends

The @samp{transformers} and @samp{nemo} backends need extra Python dependencies.  From
the repository root:

@example
uv sync --project cli --extra transformers
# or
uv sync --project cli --extra nemo
@end example

Or from @samp{cli/}:

@example
uv pip install .[transformers]
uv pip install .[nemo]
@end example

@node Editing
@chapter Editing

@menu
* Navigation::
* Deletion and restoration::
* Splitting and merging::
* Reordering::
* Markers and sections::
* Inline editing::
* Metadata::
* Undo and redo::
* Validation::
@end menu

@node Navigation
@section Navigation

@multitable {aaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@tab Description
@item @samp{j} / @samp{n}
@tab @samp{eve-next-segment}
@tab Move to next segment.
@item @samp{k} / @samp{p}
@tab @samp{eve-previous-segment}
@tab Move to previous segment.
@end multitable

@node Deletion and restoration
@section Deletion and restoration

@itemize
@item
@samp{d} (@samp{eve-delete-word}) — marks the word at point as deleted.  Deleted
words are hidden in the buffer (@samp{eve-hide-deleted-mode}) and excluded from
compilation.  The operation is non-destructive: the word remains in the JSON
and can be restored.

@item
@samp{D} (@samp{eve-delete-segment}) — marks the entire current segment as deleted.
@end itemize

Deleted content is shown or hidden with @samp{C-c C-h} (@samp{eve-hide-deleted-mode}).

@node Splitting and merging
@section Splitting and merging

@itemize
@item
@samp{s} or @samp{|} (@samp{eve-split-segment}) — splits the current segment at point,
creating two segments with the text and timing divided at the cut.

@item
@samp{m} or @samp{)} (@samp{eve-merge-with-next}) — merges the current segment with the
one below, combining text and adjusting the end time.
@end itemize

@node Reordering
@section Reordering

@itemize
@item
@samp{J} (@samp{eve-move-segment-down}) — move the current segment one position down.
@item
@samp{K} (@samp{eve-move-segment-up}) — move the current segment one position up.
@end itemize

@node Markers and sections
@section Markers and sections

Press @samp{o} (@samp{eve-insert-marker}) to insert a marker above the current segment.
Markers act as named section headings.  They appear in the buffer as bold
titles.

When you compile with @samp{C-c C-c} while point is on a marker, only the segments
in that section are compiled.  This is useful for working on one chapter of a
longer video.

@node Inline editing
@section Inline editing

Press @samp{e} (@samp{eve-dwim-edit}) to edit the text or metadata of the segment at
point.  The command adapts to context: on a word it edits the spoken text; on
a marker it edits the title.

@node Metadata
@section Metadata

@multitable {aaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@tab Description
@item @samp{t}
@tab @samp{eve-toggle-tag}
@tab Toggle a tag on the segment at point.
@item @samp{i}
@tab @samp{eve-edit-speaker}
@tab Set the speaker label for the segment.
@item @samp{r}
@tab @samp{eve-edit-start-end}
@tab Edit the segment's start/end timecodes.
@item @samp{C-c C-n}
@tab @samp{eve-edit-notes}
@tab Edit free-form notes for the segment.
@end multitable

@node Undo and redo
@section Undo and redo

@itemize
@item
@samp{u} (@samp{eve-undo}) — undo the last edit.
@item
@samp{C-r} (@samp{eve-redo}) — redo a previously undone edit.
@end itemize

Eve maintains its own undo stack separate from Emacs's built-in undo.

@node Validation
@section Validation

Eve validates the manifest automatically on every save (controlled by
@samp{eve-validation-on-save}).  Manual validation runs with @samp{C-c C-v}
(@samp{eve-validate}).  Timing inconsistencies are reported in the echo area.

@node Filler Words
@chapter Filler Words

@menu
* Concept::
* Configuration: Configuration (1). 
* Commands::
* Auto-tagging on file open::
@end menu

@node Concept
@section Concept

Filler words ("um", "uh", "you know") clutter transcripts.  Eve's filler
workflow is non-destructive: words are @emph{tagged} as fillers first, then
@emph{optionally deleted}.  Tagged fillers are highlighted in the buffer with a
distinct face and excluded from compilation.  You can untag them at any time.

@node Configuration (1)
@section Configuration

@lisp
;; Plain strings — single words or multi-word phrases
(setq eve-filler-phrases '("um" "uh" "you know" "to be honest with you"))
@end lisp

@samp{eve-filler-phrases} stores phrases as plain strings.  Matching is
case-insensitive and ignores punctuation.  The list is persisted when you use
the interactive add commands.

The legacy @samp{eve-filler-regex} variable is still honoured for backwards
compatibility but @samp{eve-filler-phrases} is preferred.

@node Commands
@section Commands

@multitable {aaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@tab Description
@item @samp{f}
@tab @samp{eve-dwim-filler}
@tab Add the word at point to phrases and retag; or delete region as filler.
@item @samp{F}
@tab @samp{eve-delete-fillers}
@tab Mark all tagged fillers as deleted.
@item @samp{C-c C-d}
@tab @samp{eve-delete-fillers}
@tab Same as @samp{F} from the @samp{C-c} prefix map.
@item —
@tab @samp{M-x eve-tag-fillers}
@tab Tag all matching words in the buffer.
@item —
@tab @samp{M-x eve-add-filler-at-point}
@tab Add the word at point to @samp{eve-filler-phrases} and retag.
@item —
@tab @samp{M-x eve-add-filler-region}
@tab Add the selected phrase to @samp{eve-filler-phrases} and retag.
@end multitable

@node Auto-tagging on file open
@section Auto-tagging on file open

Fillers are tagged automatically every time a TJM manifest is opened.  If you
add a new phrase to @samp{eve-filler-phrases}, reopen the file or run
@samp{M-x eve-tag-fillers} to apply the updated list.

@node B-Roll
@chapter B-Roll

@menu
* Concept: Concept (1). 
* Editing b-roll metadata::
* Compositing modes in detail::
* Audio policy::
* JSON templates::
* Placeholders without templates::
* Continuation chains::
@end menu

@node Concept (1)
@section Concept

B-roll is supplementary footage that plays over (or instead of) the main
recording.  Eve supports three compositing modes:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Replace} (default) — the b-roll clip completely replaces the source video
for the duration of the segment.  The source audio is kept unless you change
the audio policy.

@item
@strong{Pip} (picture-in-picture) — the b-roll is scaled down and composited on
top of the source video.  You control position and size.

@item
@strong{Overlay} — alias for replace.  Treated identically by the renderer.
@end itemize

@node Editing b-roll metadata
@section Editing b-roll metadata

Press @samp{b} (@samp{eve-edit-broll}) on a segment to set or modify its b-roll.  The
command prompts for each field in turn:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Field
@tab Prompt
@tab Description
@item @samp{file}
@tab "B-roll file"
@tab Path to a video, image, or @samp{.json} template.  Blank clears the b-roll.
@item @samp{mode}
@tab "Mode (overlay/replace/pip)"
@tab Compositing mode (see above).
@item @samp{audio}
@tab "Audio (source/mute/broll)"
@tab Which audio track the rendered segment uses.
@item @samp{start_offset}
@tab "Start offset (MM:SS or seconds)"
@tab Where to begin playback in the b-roll clip.
@item @samp{duration}
@tab "Duration (MM:SS or seconds)"
@tab How long the b-roll plays; blank uses the segment duration.
@item @samp{still}
@tab "Treat as still image?"
@tab Auto-detected for @samp{.png}, @samp{.jpg}, etc.  Loops the image for the segment.
@item @samp{continue}
@tab "Continue from previous?"
@tab Part of a continuation chain (see below).
@end multitable

Additional keys:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@tab Description
@item @samp{B}
@tab @samp{eve-toggle-broll-continue}
@tab Copy b-roll from the previous segment and mark as continuation.
@item @samp{C-c C-b}
@tab @samp{eve-edit-broll-placeholders}
@tab Edit placeholder values for the current segment.
@end multitable

B-roll metadata is stored in the segment's @samp{edit.broll} field in the JSON
manifest.

@node Compositing modes in detail
@section Compositing modes in detail

@menu
* Replace mode::
* Pip mode::
@end menu

@node Replace mode
@subsection Replace mode

The b-roll video replaces the source video entirely.  The renderer trims the
b-roll to the segment's duration, starting at @samp{start_offset}.  If the b-roll
is shorter than the segment, it is extended to fit.

When @samp{still} is true, the image is looped for the full segment duration using
@samp{ffmpeg -loop 1}.

@node Pip mode
@subsection Pip mode

The b-roll is scaled and positioned as an inset window over the source.
Position and size are controlled by a @samp{position} object in the JSON:

@example
@{
  "file": "demo-recording.mp4",
  "mode": "pip",
  "position": @{
    "x": 0.05,
    "y": 0.05,
    "width": 0.3
  @}
@}
@end example

@multitable {aaaaaaa} {aaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Field
@tab Default
@tab Description
@item @samp{x}
@tab @samp{0.05}
@tab Horizontal offset as a fraction of the main video width (0.0--1.0).
@item @samp{y}
@tab @samp{0.05}
@tab Vertical offset as a fraction of the main video height (0.0--1.0).
@item @samp{width}
@tab @samp{0.3}
@tab Width of the pip window as a fraction of the main video width.
@end multitable

The height is calculated automatically to preserve the b-roll's aspect ratio.

@node Audio policy
@section Audio policy

Each b-roll entry has an @samp{audio} field that controls which audio track
appears in the rendered segment:

@itemize
@item
@samp{source} (default) — keep the original recording's audio.
@item
@samp{broll} — use the audio track from the b-roll clip.  Not available for
still images.
@item
@samp{mute} — no audio for this segment.
@end itemize

@node JSON templates
@section JSON templates

When the @samp{file} field points to a @samp{.json} file instead of a media file, eve
treats it as a @strong{template}.  The template JSON has this structure:

@example
@{
  "template": "lower-third.png",
  "overlays": [
    @{
      "placeholder": "SPEAKER_NAME",
      "fontsize": 36,
      "color": "white",
      "x": 80,
      "y": 620,
      "boxColor": "black@@0.6"
    @},
    @{
      "placeholder": "SPEAKER_TITLE",
      "fontsize": 24,
      "color": "#cccccc",
      "x": 80,
      "y": 665
    @}
  ],
  "placeholders": @{
    "SPEAKER_NAME": "Full Name",
    "SPEAKER_TITLE": "Job Title"
  @}
@}
@end example

@itemize
@item
@samp{template} — path to the actual media file (image or video).
@item
@samp{overlays} — a list of text overlays rendered with ffmpeg @samp{drawtext}.
Each overlay references a @samp{placeholder} key by name.
@item
@samp{placeholders} — default values for each placeholder.  Segment-level
overrides (set via @samp{C-c C-b}) take precedence.
@end itemize

@menu
* Overlay fields::
* Concrete example lower-third title card::
@end menu

@node Overlay fields
@subsection Overlay fields

Each overlay in the @samp{overlays} array supports:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Field
@tab Description
@item @samp{placeholder}
@tab Name of the placeholder key this overlay renders.
@item @samp{fontsize} (or @samp{size})
@tab Font size in pixels.
@item @samp{color} (or @samp{fontColor})
@tab Font colour (ffmpeg colour syntax: name, @samp{#rrggbb}, @samp{white@@0.8}).
@item @samp{x} (or @samp{position_x})
@tab Horizontal position (pixels or ffmpeg expression like @samp{(w-text_w)/2}).
@item @samp{y} (or @samp{position_y})
@tab Vertical position (pixels or ffmpeg expression).
@item @samp{align}
@tab Set to @samp{"center"} to auto-centre horizontally and vertically.
@item @samp{font} (or @samp{fontfile})
@tab Path to a @samp{.ttf} or @samp{.otf} font file.
@item @samp{boxColor} (or @samp{box_color})
@tab Background box colour (e.g. @samp{black@@0.6} for 60% opacity).
@item @samp{shadowColor} / @samp{shadow_x} / @samp{shadow_y}
@tab Drop shadow parameters.
@item @samp{start} / @samp{end} / @samp{duration}
@tab Time window (seconds) during which the overlay is visible.
@end multitable

@node Concrete example lower-third title card
@subsection Concrete example: lower-third title card

Suppose you have a background image @samp{lower-third.png} and you want to show
the speaker's name and title during a segment.

@enumerate
@item
Create the template file @samp{assets/lower-third.json}:

@example
@{
  "template": "assets/lower-third.png",
  "overlays": [
    @{
      "placeholder": "NAME",
      "fontsize": 42,
      "color": "white",
      "x": 80,
      "y": 620,
      "font": "assets/Inter-Bold.ttf",
      "boxColor": "black@@0.5"
    @},
    @{
      "placeholder": "ROLE",
      "fontsize": 28,
      "color": "#cccccc",
      "x": 80,
      "y": 672,
      "font": "assets/Inter-Regular.ttf"
    @}
  ],
  "placeholders": @{
    "NAME": "Speaker Name",
    "ROLE": "Speaker Role"
  @}
@}
@end example

@item
In eve-mode, press @samp{b} on the segment where you want the title card.
Set @samp{file} to @samp{assets/lower-third.json}.  Set @samp{mode} to @samp{replace}.

@item
Press @samp{C-c C-b} to edit placeholders for this segment:

@example
Placeholder NAME (default Speaker Name): Jane Doe
Placeholder ROLE (default Speaker Role): Product Lead
New placeholder key (blank to finish):
@end example

@item
Compile with @samp{C-c C-c}.  The rendered segment shows @samp{lower-third.png}
with "Jane Doe" and "Product Lead" burned in as text overlays at the
specified positions and sizes.
@end enumerate

Each segment can override different placeholder values from the same
template.  The template is reused; only the text changes.

@node Placeholders without templates
@section Placeholders without templates

You can also set placeholder key-value pairs directly on a segment without
a JSON template, using @samp{C-c C-b}.  These are stored in the manifest under
@samp{edit.broll.placeholders} and are available for any overlay definitions.

@node Continuation chains
@section Continuation chains

When a single b-roll clip should span multiple consecutive segments, use
continuation chains:

@enumerate
@item
Press @samp{b} on the first segment and configure the b-roll normally.
@item
Move to the next segment and press @samp{B} (@samp{eve-toggle-broll-continue}).
@end enumerate

@samp{B} copies the b-roll metadata from the nearest preceding segment that has
b-roll, then auto-calculates:

@itemize
@item
@samp{continue}: set to @samp{true}.
@item
@samp{start_offset}: previous offset + previous segment duration, so playback
continues seamlessly from where the last segment left off.
@item
@samp{duration}: remaining duration of the b-roll clip (if the original had a
duration set).
@end itemize

Repeat @samp{B} on each subsequent segment in the chain.  The renderer treats the
entire chain as one continuous b-roll playback — the clip advances smoothly
across segment boundaries without restarting.

@node Compilation and Rendering
@chapter Compilation and Rendering

@menu
* Two modes draft and final::
* Under the hood::
* Pre-flight validation::
* Dry-run analysis::
* Checkpoint and resume::
* Progressive output::
* Configuration reference::
* CLI reference::
@end menu

@node Two modes draft and final
@section Two modes: draft and final

@samp{C-c C-c} (@samp{eve-compile}) compiles the manifest at draft quality — fast
enough to catch mistakes before committing to a full export.

@samp{C-u C-c C-c} compiles at final quality (H.264 medium/CRF 18) for delivery.

The quality used can be changed permanently with @samp{eve-compile-quality}.

@node Under the hood
@section Under the hood

Eve's rendering pipeline is designed to be fast after the first run:

@itemize
@item
@strong{Quality profiles} — draft uses MJPEG encoding at ultrafast preset; final
uses H.264 at medium preset.  The codec and preset are resolved
automatically from the @samp{--quality} flag.

@item
@strong{Parallel encoding} — segments are encoded concurrently across all available
CPU cores (@samp{eve-compile-jobs}).

@item
@strong{Segment cache} — rendered segments are stored in @samp{.eve-cache/} next to the
manifest, keyed by a SHA-256 hash of the segment's content and encoding
settings.  Unchanged segments are reused; only changed ones re-encode.

@item
@strong{Speculative pre-rendering} — after each save, an idle timer
(@samp{eve-auto-render-idle-seconds}) fires a background render of the segments
that changed.  When you press @samp{C-c C-c}, the cache is already warm and
compilation reduces to a concat step.
@end itemize

@node Pre-flight validation
@section Pre-flight validation

Before starting a render, eve validates the manifest:

@itemize
@item
All source files must exist and be readable.
@item
All b-roll files must exist.
@item
Segment timecodes must be non-negative and end after start.
@item
Words must fall within their segment bounds.
@end itemize

Warnings appear in the echo area.  Errors block compilation unless you
confirm.  Run validation explicitly with @samp{C-c C-v} (@samp{eve-validate}).

If the estimated render time (from the dry-run analysis) exceeds
@samp{eve-compile-confirm-threshold} seconds, eve asks for confirmation.

@node Dry-run analysis
@section Dry-run analysis

Before rendering, eve can report which segments would be re-encoded and
estimate the render time:

@example
eve text-edit manifest.tjm.json --output out.mp4 --dry-run
@end example

The output (JSON with @samp{--json}) includes @samp{total_segments},
@samp{changed_segments}, and @samp{estimated_seconds}.  This information feeds the
pre-flight confirmation prompt.

@node Checkpoint and resume
@section Checkpoint and resume

If a render is interrupted, eve writes a checkpoint file in @samp{.eve-cache/} as
segments complete.  The next run picks up from where it left off: segments
already in the cache are reused, and only the remaining ones are encoded.

Pass @samp{--no-resume} to force a fresh render from scratch.

@node Progressive output
@section Progressive output

With @samp{--partial-every N}, eve writes a partial @samp{<output>.partial.mp4} after
every N segments complete.  A JSON event is emitted on stdout for each
partial file, which Emacs can use to update a live preview.

@node Configuration reference
@section Configuration reference

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Variable
@tab Default
@tab Description
@item @samp{eve-compile-quality}
@tab @samp{"draft"}
@tab @samp{"draft"} for fast preview, @samp{"final"} for delivery.
@item @samp{eve-compile-jobs}
@tab @samp{0}
@tab Parallel encode workers; 0 = auto-detect CPU count.
@item @samp{eve-compile-scale}
@tab @samp{1.0}
@tab Resolution scale for draft (e.g. @samp{0.5} = half res).
@item @samp{eve-compile-cache}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Use the @samp{.eve-cache/} segment cache.
@item @samp{eve-compile-confirm-threshold}
@tab @samp{30}
@tab Estimated seconds above which a confirmation prompt appears.
@item @samp{eve-auto-render}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Speculatively pre-render changed segments after each save.
@item @samp{eve-auto-render-idle-seconds}
@tab @samp{2.0}
@tab Idle delay before the speculative render fires.
@item @samp{eve-play-after-compile}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab When non-nil, play the output automatically after compilation.
@item @samp{eve-preserve-gaps-max}
@tab @samp{2.0}
@tab Maximum gap (seconds) that is preserved between segments.
@end multitable

@node CLI reference
@section CLI reference

Under normal Emacs usage you never need to call @samp{eve text-edit} directly —
the Emacs commands handle all flags.  For scripting or CI:

@example
eve text-edit manifest.tjm.json --output out.mp4 [FLAGS]

--quality draft|final   Encoding profile (default: draft)
--codec h264|mjpeg      Override intermediate codec
--scale FACTOR          Resolution scale (e.g. 0.5)
--jobs N                Parallel workers (0 = auto)
--cache-dir PATH        Segment cache location (default: .eve-cache/)
--no-cache              Disable segment cache
--cache-max-size GB     Cache eviction threshold (default: 10)
--validate              Check manifest without rendering
--dry-run               Report cache hits/misses and estimated time
--segments ID [ID …]    Pre-render only listed segments into cache
--no-resume             Ignore checkpoint from a prior interrupted render
--partial-every N       Write a partial .mp4 every N segments
@end example

@node Playback
@chapter Playback

@menu
* Source playback::
* Rendered playback::
* Playback tracking and segment highlighting::
* Controls::
* Video layout::
@end menu

@node Source playback
@section Source playback

@samp{C-c SPC} (@samp{eve-play}) or @samp{SPC} / @samp{RET} (@samp{eve-play-segment}) plays the
source media from the current segment to the end of the clip.  All segments
from the same source file are tracked, so the playback highlight follows even
across segments.

Playback position maps directly to the original recording timestamps.

@node Rendered playback
@section Rendered playback

@samp{C-u C-c SPC} (@samp{eve-play} with prefix) or @samp{C-c C-p} (@samp{eve-play-rendered})
plays the compiled output file.  If the output is missing or older than the
manifest, eve compiles it first.

Progress is tracked using the post-edit rendered timeline; deleted content is
skipped in the position calculation.

@node Playback tracking and segment highlighting
@section Playback tracking and segment highlighting

Eve integrates with mpv via its JSON IPC socket.  The currently-playing
segment is highlighted with a vivid amber overlay (@samp{eve-playback-face}),
distinct from both the focus highlight and the region.

@node Controls
@section Controls

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Action
@item @samp{SPC} (during playback)
@tab Pause / resume.
@item Move point to a segment
@tab Seek mpv to that segment's start time.
@item @samp{C-c k} / @samp{M-x eve-stop-playback}
@tab Stop playback and restore keybindings.
@item @samp{<left>}
@tab Seek backward @samp{eve-seek-short-seconds} (default 5s).
@item @samp{<right>}
@tab Seek forward @samp{eve-seek-short-seconds} (default 5s).
@item @samp{S-<left>}
@tab Seek backward @samp{eve-seek-long-backward-seconds} (default 30s).
@item @samp{S-<right>}
@tab Seek forward @samp{eve-seek-long-forward-seconds} (default 10s).
@end multitable

Stopping playback restores all keybindings to their normal state.

@node Video layout
@section Video layout

Set @samp{eve-video-layout} to @samp{t} to arrange the screen for editing: Emacs takes
the bottom portion of the display and mpv sits directly above it —
borderless, always-on-top, with automatic letterboxing.

@lisp
(setq eve-video-layout t)

;; Fraction of screen height for the video window (default 0.6 = 60%)
(setq eve-video-layout-ratio 0.6)
@end lisp

The layout activates on the first play command and the original frame geometry
is restored when playback stops.  Skipped when Emacs is in macOS native
fullscreen.

Configuration:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Variable
@tab Default
@tab Description
@item @samp{eve-play-program}
@tab @samp{"mpv"}
@tab Player binary.
@item @samp{eve-play-args}
@tab @samp{(list "--quiet" ...)}
@tab Extra arguments passed to the player.
@item @samp{eve-video-layout}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Enable automatic screen layout on play.
@item @samp{eve-video-layout-ratio}
@tab @samp{0.6}
@tab Fraction of screen height for the video.
@item @samp{eve-seek-short-seconds}
@tab @samp{5}
@tab Short seek step in seconds.
@item @samp{eve-seek-long-backward-seconds}
@tab @samp{30}
@tab Long backward seek step in seconds.
@item @samp{eve-seek-long-forward-seconds}
@tab @samp{10}
@tab Long forward seek step in seconds.
@end multitable

@node Display
@chapter Display

@menu
* Timestamp ruler::
* Hiding deleted segments::
* Word-level display::
@end menu

@node Timestamp ruler
@section Timestamp ruler

@samp{eve-ruler-mode} (active by default) displays @samp{[hh:mm:ss]} markers in the
right margin.  Each marker is placed next to the segment that @emph{reaches} that
milestone in the rendered video — deleted content is excluded from the running
total.

The total rendered duration appears in the mode line.

@lisp
;; Change the milestone interval (default 30 seconds)
(setq eve-ruler-interval 60.0)
@end lisp

Toggle the ruler with @samp{C-c C-l} (@samp{eve-ruler-mode}).

@node Hiding deleted segments
@section Hiding deleted segments

@samp{C-c C-h} (@samp{eve-hide-deleted-mode}) toggles visibility of deleted words and
segments.  When active (the default), deleted content is hidden and the
transcript reads as it will render.  When inactive, deleted content appears
with a strikethrough face.

@node Word-level display
@section Word-level display

@samp{C-c C-w} (@samp{eve-toggle-words}) shows or hides per-word timing annotations
under each segment.  Useful when inspecting or adjusting precise cut points.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Variable
@tab Default
@tab Description
@item @samp{eve-ruler-interval}
@tab @samp{30.0}
@tab Seconds between ruler markers.
@item @samp{eve-show-words-by-default}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Show word timings on buffer open.
@item @samp{eve-validation-on-save}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Validate manifest on every save.
@item @samp{eve-validation-time-tolerance}
@tab @samp{0.1}
@tab Timing slack tolerated during validation (seconds).
@end multitable

@node Key Bindings
@chapter Key Bindings

@menu
* Single-key bindings::
* C-c prefix bindings::
* Playback-mode overrides::
* The hydra cheatsheet::
@end menu

@node Single-key bindings
@section Single-key bindings

These bindings are active in eve-mode.  The table below is auto-generated
from the keymap by @samp{scripts/gen-docs}.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@item @samp{?}
@tab @samp{eve--show-help}
@item @samp{q}
@tab @samp{eve-dwim-quit}
@item @samp{g}
@tab @samp{eve-reload}
@item @samp{C-RET}
@tab @samp{eve-toggle-separator}
@item @samp{_}
@tab @samp{eve-toggle-separator}
@item @samp{S-<right>}
@tab @samp{eve-seek-long-forward}
@item @samp{S-<left>}
@tab @samp{eve-seek-long-backward}
@item @samp{<right>}
@tab @samp{eve-seek-short-forward}
@item @samp{<left>}
@tab @samp{eve-seek-short-backward}
@item @samp{RET}
@tab @samp{eve-play-segment}
@item @samp{SPC}
@tab @samp{eve-play-segment}
@item @samp{F}
@tab @samp{eve-delete-fillers}
@item @samp{f}
@tab @samp{eve-dwim-filler}
@item @samp{r}
@tab @samp{eve-edit-start-end}
@item @samp{i}
@tab @samp{eve-edit-speaker}
@item @samp{B}
@tab @samp{eve-toggle-broll-continue}
@item @samp{b}
@tab @samp{eve-edit-broll}
@item @samp{t}
@tab @samp{eve-toggle-tag}
@item @samp{o}
@tab @samp{eve-insert-marker}
@item @samp{e}
@tab @samp{eve-dwim-edit}
@item @samp{C-r}
@tab @samp{eve-redo}
@item @samp{u}
@tab @samp{eve-undo}
@item @samp{)}
@tab @samp{eve-merge-with-next}
@item @samp{m}
@tab @samp{eve-merge-with-next}
@item @samp{s}
@tab @samp{eve-split-segment}
@item @samp{D}
@tab @samp{eve-delete-segment}
@item @samp{d}
@tab @samp{eve-delete-word}
@item @samp{K}
@tab @samp{eve-move-segment-up}
@item @samp{J}
@tab @samp{eve-move-segment-down}
@item @samp{p}
@tab @samp{eve-previous-segment}
@item @samp{n}
@tab @samp{eve-next-segment}
@item @samp{k}
@tab @samp{eve-previous-segment}
@item @samp{j}
@tab @samp{eve-next-segment}
@end multitable

@node C-c prefix bindings
@section C-c prefix bindings

@multitable {aaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@item @samp{C-c C-d}
@tab @samp{eve-delete-fillers}
@item @samp{C-c C-n}
@tab @samp{eve-edit-notes}
@item @samp{C-c C-b}
@tab @samp{eve-edit-broll-placeholders}
@item @samp{C-c SPC}
@tab @samp{eve-play}
@item @samp{C-c C-s}
@tab @samp{eve-play-source}
@item @samp{C-c C-p}
@tab @samp{eve-play-rendered}
@item @samp{C-c C-t}
@tab @samp{eve-transcribe}
@item @samp{C-c C-l}
@tab @samp{eve-ruler-mode}
@item @samp{C-c C-w}
@tab @samp{eve-toggle-words}
@item @samp{C-c C-h}
@tab @samp{eve-hide-deleted-mode}
@item @samp{C-c C-o}
@tab @samp{eve-open-raw-json}
@item @samp{C-c C-r}
@tab @samp{eve-reload}
@item @samp{C-c C-v}
@tab @samp{eve-validate}
@item @samp{C-c C-c}
@tab @samp{eve-compile}
@end multitable

Prefix-arg variants: @samp{C-u C-c C-c} compiles at final quality; @samp{C-u C-c SPC}
plays the rendered output instead of the source.

@node Playback-mode overrides
@section Playback-mode overrides

During active playback, these bindings override the normal keymap:

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Key
@tab Command
@item @samp{q}
@tab @samp{eve-stop-playback}
@item @samp{S-<right>}
@tab @samp{eve-seek-long-forward}
@item @samp{S-<left>}
@tab @samp{eve-seek-long-backward}
@item @samp{<right>}
@tab @samp{eve-seek-short-forward}
@item @samp{<left>}
@tab @samp{eve-seek-short-backward}
@item @samp{SPC}
@tab @samp{eve-playback-pause-resume}
@end multitable

@node The hydra cheatsheet
@section The hydra cheatsheet

If the @samp{hydra} package is installed, pressing @samp{?} opens a graphical popup
showing all keybindings grouped by category.  Without hydra, @samp{?} displays a
brief summary in the echo area instead.

To install hydra:

@lisp
(use-package hydra)
@end lisp

@node Configuration Reference
@chapter Configuration Reference

All eve variables belong to the @samp{eve} customization group.  Access it with
@samp{M-x customize-group RET eve RET}.

The table below is auto-generated from the defcustom forms in @samp{eve.el} by
@samp{scripts/gen-docs}.

@multitable {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa} {aaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaa}
@headitem Variable
@tab Default
@tab Description
@item @samp{eve-auto-render}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Whether to speculatively pre-render changed segments on save.
@item @samp{eve-auto-render-idle-seconds}
@tab @samp{2.0}
@tab Idle time in seconds before a background speculative render fires after save.
@item @samp{eve-cli-program}
@tab @samp{"eve"}
@tab Executable used for `eve` CLI commands.
@item @samp{eve-compile-cache}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Whether to use the persistent segment cache during compilation.
@item @samp{eve-compile-confirm-threshold}
@tab @samp{30}
@tab Seconds above which `eve-compile' asks before starting.
@item @samp{eve-compile-jobs}
@tab @samp{0}
@tab Number of segments to encode in parallel, passed to `eve text-edit --jobs'.
@item @samp{eve-compile-quality}
@tab @samp{"draft"}
@tab Default encoding quality passed to `eve text-edit --quality'.
@item @samp{eve-compile-scale}
@tab @samp{1.0}
@tab Resolution scale factor passed to `eve text-edit --scale'.
@item @samp{eve-filler-phrases}
@tab @samp{("um" "uh")}
@tab Filler words/phrases to tag in transcripts.
@item @samp{eve-filler-regex}
@tab @samp{("\\`um\\'" "\\`uh\\'")}
@tab Regexps matched against word text when tagging filler words.
@item @samp{eve-media-extensions}
@tab @samp{(...)}
@tab Supported media extensions for transcription inputs.
@item @samp{eve-play-after-compile}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab Whether to play the rendered video automatically after compilation.
@item @samp{eve-play-args}
@tab @samp{(...)}
@tab Additional arguments passed to `eve-play-program'.
@item @samp{eve-play-program}
@tab @samp{"mpv"}
@tab Executable used for segment playback.
@item @samp{eve-preserve-gaps-max}
@tab @samp{2.0}
@tab Maximum gap duration preserved during `eve text-edit` compilation.
@item @samp{eve-ruler-interval}
@tab @samp{30.0}
@tab Interval in seconds between right-margin timestamp ruler markers.
@item @samp{eve-seek-long-backward-seconds}
@tab @samp{30}
@tab Seconds used by long backward seek commands.
@item @samp{eve-seek-long-forward-seconds}
@tab @samp{10}
@tab Seconds used by long forward seek commands.
@item @samp{eve-seek-short-seconds}
@tab @samp{5}
@tab Seconds used by short seek commands.
@item @samp{eve-show-words-by-default}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab If non-nil, show per-word timings when rendering segments.
@item @samp{eve-transcribe-backend}
@tab @samp{"faster-whisper"}
@tab Backend passed to `eve transcribe'.
@item @samp{eve-transcribe-model}
@tab @samp{"medium.en"}
@tab Model passed to `eve transcribe'.
@item @samp{eve-transcribe-tag-fillers}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Whether `eve transcribe' should tag filler words.
@item @samp{eve-transcribe-verbatim}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Whether `eve transcribe' should preserve verbatim output.
@item @samp{eve-validation-on-save}
@tab @samp{t}
@tab Whether TJM buffers should be validated automatically on save.
@item @samp{eve-validation-time-tolerance}
@tab @samp{0.1}
@tab Permitted slack (in seconds) when comparing segment and word timings.
@item @samp{eve-video-layout}
@tab @samp{nil}
@tab When non-nil, arrange the screen for video editing on the first play command.
@item @samp{eve-video-layout-ratio}
@tab @samp{0.6}
@tab Fraction of screen height reserved for the video window (0.0–1.0).
@end multitable

@node Architecture
@chapter Architecture

@menu
* Two-layer boundary::
* Shared contract::
@end menu

@node Two-layer boundary
@section Two-layer boundary

Eve is deliberately split into two independent layers:

@itemize
@item
@strong{The Emacs package} (@samp{eve.el}) owns the user interface: major mode,
interactive editing commands, playback integration, asynchronous process
launching, and parsing of CLI output.  It does not implement media-processing
logic.

@item
@strong{The CLI} (@samp{cli/}, Python) owns all media processing: manifest generation,
denoise orchestration, filler policy, timeline construction, and FFmpeg
invocation.  It does not embed Emacs-specific behaviour.
@end itemize

This boundary means the CLI can be used standalone (e.g. in CI pipelines) and
the Emacs package can evolve independently.

@node Shared contract
@section Shared contract

The two layers communicate through:

@itemize
@item
@strong{TJM files on disk} — the @samp{.tjm.json} format defined in @samp{docs/tjm-spec.md}.
@item
@strong{Machine-readable JSON output} — the CLI emits structured JSON when called
with @samp{--json}; the Emacs package parses it.
@item
@strong{Stable exit codes} — 0 for success, non-zero for failure.
@end itemize

@node Development
@chapter Development

This manual focuses on using Eve.

For contributor setup, local commands, CI parity, and documentation generation,
see @uref{../CONTRIBUTING.md, CONTRIBUTING.md}.

The combined local test command is:

@example
devenv shell -- test-all
@end example

If you are editing this manual itself, regenerate the Info output with:

@example
devenv shell -- docs
@end example

@node Appendix A TJM v11 Specification
@appendix Appendix A: TJM v1.1 Specification

The normative TJM v1.1 specification is maintained in @samp{docs/tjm-spec.md} in
the repository.  It defines:

@itemize
@item
The complete JSON schema for @samp{.tjm.json} files.
@item
The tick-based timing model and its relationship to real-time seconds.
@item
The edit overlay structure (@samp{edit} field on segments and words).
@item
The deterministic render contract that @samp{eve text-edit} implements.
@item
Migration paths from earlier TJM versions.
@end itemize

To read the specification, open @samp{docs/tjm-spec.md} in the repository or visit
the repository at @uref{https://github.com/behaghel/eve.el}.

@bye
